EDU-8: Modernizes 'first program' Java (#264)
temporalio/temporal-learning: docs/getting_started/java/first_program_in_java/index.md

  *Always* set a schedule-to-close timeout limit.
  Schedule-to-close includes the entire duration of an activity.
  Otherwise, by default, Temporal retries failed activities forever.
* **Activity-specific options** adjust options for specific Activity types.

:::note Non-Retryable Errors

Although not shown in this code sample, you can specify Activity error types that Temporal should not attempt to retry.
Set the Retry Option's non-retryable errors field.
This provides you with the flexibility to choose the circumstances to retry.

:::

Now that you've seen the code, it's time to look at the Workflow in action.
In the next sections, you'll launch the Temporal Server and create a Workflow Execution.

## Start the Workflow

In this section, you'll run and observe a Workflow using the project code and the Temporal Web UI.

### Prepare to run

Start running a [Temporal Service](https://docs.temporal.io/clusters) by launching it from a Terminal session, as discussed in the [Getting Started tutorial](https://learn.temporal.io/getting_started/java/dev_environment/):

```bash

> temporal server start-dev --ui-port 8080

Author: ```suggestion
temporal server start-dev \
    --ui-port 8080
```

The Workflow Execution (Event History and other metadata) lives on the Temporal Service.
Exiting the application does not affect this.

### Run the money transfer app

To run the app, issue this Maven command:

```
mvn compile exec:java \
    -Dexec.mainClass="moneytransferapp.TransferApp" \
    -Dorg.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=warn
```

It creates a new transfer request for a random amount between $15 and $75:

```bash
MONEY TRANSFER PROJECT

Initiating transfer of $45 from [Account 711713707] to [Account 221056126].

[WorkflowID: money-transfer-workflow]
[RunID: 37688cca-ffa2-48cf-809b-f18f5119bca3]
[Transaction Reference: a0061bb5-a718-47cb]
```

The request is produced as a Workflow Execution and sent to the Temporal Server.
The Temporal Server is an essential part of the overall system, but requires additional components for operation.
The complete system is known as the Temporal Service, which is a deployment of the Temporal Server, plus the additional components used with it such as a database like Apache Cassandra, PostgreSQL, or MySQL.

:::note

This app uses a hard-coded "money-transfer-workflow" string for the Workflow ID.

> If this happens to you, just ignore the error.

Author: ```suggestion
```

        TransactionDetails transaction = new CoreTransactionDetails(fromAccount, toAccount, referenceId, amountToTransfer);

        // Perform asynchronous execution.
        // This process exits after making this call and printing details.
        WorkflowExecution we = WorkflowClient.start(workflow::transfer, transaction);

        System.out.printf("\nMONEY TRANSFER PROJECT\n\n");
        System.out.printf("Initiating transfer of $%d from [Account %s] to [Account %s].\n\n",
                          amountToTransfer, fromAccount, toAccount);
        System.out.printf("[WorkflowID: %s]\n[RunID: %s]\n[Transaction Reference: %s]\n\n", we.getWorkflowId(), we.getRunId(), referenceId);
        System.exit(0);
    }
```
<!--SNIPEND-->

This code builds a Temporal Client, which is an object that can communicate with the Temporal Service.
The Client is used to create a new Workflow stub that points to the Workflow method.
With the details for the transfer collected together in a single instance (`transaction`), the `WorkflowClient` type creates a new Workflow Execution using the stub and the `transaction` instance.

> The execution runs asynchronously.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The Workflow Execution (Event History and other metadata) lives on the Temporal Service.
Exiting the application does not affect this.

### Run the money transfer app

To run the app, issue this Maven command:

```
mvn compile exec:java \
    -Dexec.mainClass="moneytransferapp.TransferApp" \
    -Dorg.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=warn
```

It creates a new transfer request for a random amount between $15 and $75:

```bash
MONEY TRANSFER PROJECT

Initiating transfer of $45 from [Account 711713707] to [Account 221056126].

[WorkflowID: money-transfer-workflow]
[RunID: 37688cca-ffa2-48cf-809b-f18f5119bca3]
[Transaction Reference: a0061bb5-a718-47cb]
```

The request is produced as a Workflow Execution and sent to the Temporal Server.
The Temporal Server is an essential part of the overall system, but requires additional components for operation.
The complete system is known as the Temporal Service, which is a deployment of the Temporal Server, plus the additional components used with it such as a database like Apache Cassandra, PostgreSQL, or MySQL.

:::note

This app uses a hard-coded "money-transfer-workflow" string for the Workflow ID.

> If you run the transfer app a second time, you'll raise an error unless a Worker is running and has already processed the previous request.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Test this by stopping the local Temporal Cluster while a Workflow is running.

Try it out by following these steps:

1. Stop your Worker.
   Switch to the terminal that's running your Worker and press `CTRL+C`.
1. Return to the terminal window running the development server.
   Shut it down with `CTRL+C`.
1. After the Temporal Cluster has stopped, restart it to use a local database.

   
```bash
   temporal server start-dev \
       --log-level=never \
       --ui-port 8080 \
       --db-filename=temporal.db
   ```

1. Switch back to the terminal where your Workflow ran.
   Start a new Workflow Execution.

   
```bash
   mvn compile exec:java \
       -Dexec.mainClass="moneytransferapp.TransferApp" \
       -Dorg.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=warn
   ```

   Note the WorkflowID and RunID.
   They also appear in the WebUI and help you locate the process you were using.

1. Return to the development server terminal session.
   Shut it down with `CTRL+C`.
1. Re-start the server, using the same data.

   
```bash
   temporal server start-dev \
       --log-level=never \
       --ui-port 8080 \
       --db-filename=temporal.db

>    ```

Author: ```suggestion
```
```

---
title: Run your first Temporal application with the Java SDK
id: first-app-java
sidebar_position: 2
description: Run your first Java Temporal app. Explore Workflows, Activities, Task Queues, and compensating transactions. Learn how Temporal recovers from failures.
tags: [java, SDK]
last_update:
  date: 2024-06-10
code_repo: https://github.com/temporalio/money-transfer-project-java
image: /img/temporal-logo-twitter-card.png
---

![Temporal Java SDK](/img/sdk_banners/banner_java.png)

:::note Tutorial information

- **Level**: ⭐ Temporal beginner
- **Time**: ⏱️ ~20 minutes
- **Goals**: 🙌
  - Explore Temporal's core terminology and concepts.
  - Complete several runs of a Temporal Workflow application using a Temporal Cluster and the [Java SDK](https://github.com/temporalio/java-sdk).
  - Practice reviewing the state of the Workflow.
  - Understand the inherent reliability of Workflow methods.

:::

Temporal addresses many challenges developers face when building reliable applications.

> Whether managing complex transaction-based workflows or calling remote APIs, creating reliable applications involves significant overhead.

Author: It's generic, so lower-case. I'd love a different word though. maybe "process"

> Whether managing complex transaction-based workflows or calling remote APIs, creating reliable applications involves significant overhead.

Author: ```suggestion
Whether managing complex transaction-based processes or calling remote APIs, creating reliable applications involves significant overhead.
```

```bash
cd money-transfer-project-java
```

You're now ready to start exploring how Temporal breaks down applications into recoverable pieces.

## Explore the Workflow and Activity Definitions

Each Temporal application uses some or all of the following building blocks:

1. A [Workflow](https://docs.temporal.io/workflows) defines the overall flow of a business process from start to end.
   Each Workflow defines a process that needs to be resilient and run completely from start to finish.
   Workflows handle sequences of application stages or react to external events.
   They are also great for dealing with timers and schedules.
1. An [Activity](https://docs.temporal.io/activities) implements business logic that's prone to failure.
    For example, if your flow calls a service sometimes becomes unavailable, use an Activity.
    Activities can be automatically retried when they run up against failures that can be handled through additional attempts.
    This is because many third-party failures are self-correcting over time, as outages are resolved or backup services are brought online.
1. A [Worker](https://docs.temporal.io/workers) interacts with the Temporal Service.

>    It checks for available work and then initiates Workflow and Activity Tasks as needed.

Author: I'm torn. I think "polls" is more accurate but "checks" is more human in this context, so I'm going to keep as is. Thanks for calling it out and letting me consider the options.

   Workers report Task statuses and results back to the Temporal Service.

### Workflows

You build Temporal applications using an abstraction called Workflows.
Develop your Workflows by writing code in a general-purpose programming language like Java.
A [Workflow Definition](https://docs.temporal.io/workflows#workflow-definition) is Java code that defines the steps for a business process.
The Temporal Service runs these steps and monitors the Workflow progress.
This progress is stored as a [Workflow Execution](https://docs.temporal.io/workflows#workflow-execution) on the Service.

The Temporal Service manages and oversees Workflow Executions.
It breaks down each Workflow into Tasks: Workflow Tasks and Activity Tasks.
Each Activity Task executes a single well-defined but failable step, such as calling another service, transcoding a media file, or sending an email message.
The Service dispatches these tasks to a Task Queue, where a Worker can pick them up and run them.

The Money Transfer application uses one Workflow.
It transfers money by withdrawing from a source account and depositing to a destination account.
It defines two Activity methods: `withdraw` and `deposit`.

> These are Activities because both processes might fail.

Author: I'm adding a note to self to make sure possibility of failure isn't repeated on another line. Great suggestion, thanks.

The Workflow calls `withdraw` and then `deposit`.
The following diagram illustrates what happens when you start the Workflow:

![High level project design](images/temporal-high-level-application-design.png)

:::caution SIMPLIFIED EXAMPLE

Transferring money is a tricky subject.
This Tutorial example doesn't cover all possible issues.

> It can't clean up if a Workflow is cancelled.

Author: I'm adding a note to self to make sure money is withdrawn but not deposited isn't repeated on another line. Great suggestion, thanks.

> It doesn't handle edge cases where money is withdrawn but not deposited.

Author: And, woo! There we go. Taking that off my list of "to check/to do". Thank you for covering both spots.

The code is written in your favorite SDK language.
None of that code runs on the Temporal Service.

What lives on the Service are Workflow Executions.
A Workflow Execution stores the progress of your code.
It keeps track of the Event History and state of your Workflow and Activity tasks.
As you'll see in this tutorial, Workflow Executions allow you to resume interrupted work.
This means you can always complete your tasks and you won't have to repeat work that's already been successfully finished.

### Workflow Definition

A Temporal Workflow uses attributes from the Temporal Java SDK to integrate Temporal Service's orchestration into code.
In Java, a Workflow Definition is broken down into the type interface and its implementation.
This section shows you how to integrate these pieces with the Temporal Service using SDK annotations.

#### Workflow interface

Mark your Workflow Definition with the **`@WorkflowInterface`** attribute:

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-workflow-interface {"selectedLines": ["3-12"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

Mark each Workflow entry point with **`@WorkflowMethod`** attribute.

> A Workflow Interface can define multiple Workflow methods but this class defines a single `transfer` method.

Author: Fixing this. And putting myself in the naughty corner.

> A Workflow Interface can define multiple Workflow methods but this class defines a single `transfer` method.

Author: ```suggestion
The Workflow Interface defines a single `transfer` method as its only point of entry.
```

It has one parameter, a `transaction` that stores the transfer details for this process.
Integrating transaction details into a single structure means the method signature won't change, even if you later update your code implementation:

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-transaction-details {"selectedLines": ["5-10"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

A reference ID makes each transaction unique and trackable.
Some third party APIs let you send a unique key (sometimes called an _idempotency key_) with your transaction details.
The key ensures your transaction won't be run a second time, even if the external provider did not or could not report success.
Idempotency keys compensate for any mismatches between your application's state and an external service provider's state.

#### Workflow implementation

The `MoneyTransferWorkflow` implementation requests data be sent from one account to another.
This Workflow includes compensatory logic.
If the withdrawal or deposit fails, money is returned as needed:

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-workflow-implementation {"selectedLines": ["3-12", "42-105"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

> Unlike a normal Java program, you don't call Activities directly in Temporal apps.

Author: ```suggestion
Unlike a normal Java program, you don't call Activities directly in Temporal apps, you invoke them through an Activity stub.
```

> Unlike a normal Java program, you don't call Activities directly in Temporal apps.

Author: ```suggestion
Unlike a normal Java program, you don't call Activities directly in Temporal apps, you invoke them through an Activity stub.
```

> You invoke them through an Activity stub.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> This is part of the Temporal oversight mechanism.

Author: ```suggestion
This is part of the Temporal oversight mechanism, in which Temporal tracks progress and state.
```

> This is part of the Temporal oversight mechanism.

Author: ```suggestion
This is part of the Temporal oversight mechanism, in which Temporal tracks progress and state.
```

Temporal tracks progress and state.

> It supports features like automatic Activity retries when code encounters adverse conditions that prevent Activities from completing normally.

Author: Doing. Thanks

> It supports features like automatic Activity retries when code encounters adverse conditions that prevent Activities from completing normally.

Author: Well GitHub won't let me do it here, so I'll pull and deal with it locally

:::note

This code extract omits some implementation details before the `transfer` method.
These are discussed later in this tutorial.

:::

## Activities

Activities perform any business logic that is either subject to failure or non-deterministic.

### Fail points

> A failed call may need to be retried.

Author: This is such a great edit. Thanks

Whether fetching the time or reading an account balance, those results are now fixed and stored in the Workflow Execution Event History.
If run again, the Activity might return a different result.
That would break determinism.

:::

### Activity Attributes

When defining Activities, mark the class interface with `@ActivityInterface` and methods with `@ActivityMethod`:

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-activity-interface {"selectedLines": ["3-19"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

#### Activity Implementation

This `AccountActivity` class implements three Activity methods: `withdraw`, `deposit`, and `refund`:

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-activity-implementation {"selectedLines": ["3-42"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

* The `withdraw` method represents a process that calls a service to remove money from a source account.
  It always succeeds.
* The `deposit` process "attempts" to add money to a destination account.
  Its success is controlled by the `activityShouldSucceed` Boolean, which is set to `true`.
  If you change this to `false`, the "deposit" fails and throws an exception.
* The `refund process mimics the `deposit` process.

:::note Recovering a failed Workflow

> It is not part of this tutorial, but you can try setting both `activityShouldSucceed` Booleans to false to see a Workflow Execution fail.

Reviewer: Is this a Workflow Execution fail or a Workflow Task fail? If the Workflow in the Web UI has entered the FAILED state it is an Execution failure. If so, can you reset a Workflow that has entered the closed state? Does it spawn a new Workflow Execution? Once a Workflow is in a closed state it can't be re-opened, but I've never tried reseting one that is closed to see if it starts a new Execution. 
```suggestion
It is not part of this tutorial, but you can try setting both `activityShouldSucceed` Booleans to false to see a Workflow Task fail.
```

Author: Great catch.

Temporal lets you recover the Workflow.
Stop the Worker, revert the changes, and restart
With the "fixed" Worker running, use the Temporal Web UI (you'll read about it shortly) to reset the failed Workflow Execution to a point in its Event History where it can pick up and complete its work.

:::

## Set the Retry Policy

Temporal makes software durable and fault-tolerant by design.

> The Service can "retry" Activities, which are failable by nature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Service can retry Activities, which are failable by nature.
```

That is, it can wait a little time for an issue to resolve, and then try running the Activity again, repeating as needed.

> You customize how this happens in a retry policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may customize how this happens in a Retry Policy.
```

That policy, along with time-out settings, is defined in the following Workflow implementation:

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-workflow-implementation {"selectedLines": ["12-37"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

This code includes several components:

* **`RetryOptions`** define how to automatically re-attempt an Activity that's failed.
  This includes backoff coefficients (`setBackoffCoefficient`) that treat service providers' endpoints with respect, so you don't slam them at once.
  Exponential backoffs allow a service time to recover.
  In this code, if an Activity fails, the Service waits a second, then two seconds, then four, etc.
  It fails after five attempts (`setMaximumAttempts`).
  It won't wait more than 20 seconds between attempts (`setMaximumInterval`).
* **`ActivityOptions`** define fixed limits for how long an Activity can keep trying before the Service shuts down further attempts.

>   *Always* set a schedule-to-close timeout limit.

Reviewer: We don't recommend this. We say you must set either a Start-To-Close timeout or a Schedule-To-Close timeout but Start-To-Close is preferred because it is easier to estimate the entire time an Activity may need and not the scheduling aspects of Temporal, which can vary.

Author: Tiho lectured me because you can end up with infinite loops. I'm going to pass this by before making changes.

  Schedule-to-close includes the entire duration of an activity.
  Otherwise, by default, Temporal retries failed activities forever.
* **Activity-specific options** adjust options for specific Activity types.

> :::note Retryable Errors

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::note Non-Retryable Errors
```

> Although not shown in this code sample, you can specify Activity errors that Temporal should not attempt to retry.

Reviewer: Non-retryable errors vs. non-retryable error types have a distinct difference. Check out the new errors course content for more. 
```suggestion
Although not shown in this code sample, you can specify Activity error types that Temporal should not attempt to retry.
```

Author: Definitely will. And a great catch.

Set the Retry Option's non-retryable errors field.
This provides you with the flexibility to choose the circumstances to retry.

:::

Now that you've seen the code, it's time to look at the Workflow in action.
In the next sections, you'll launch the Temporal Server and create a Workflow Execution.

## Start the Workflow

In this section, you'll run and observe a Workflow using the project code and the Temporal Web UI.

### Prepare to run

Start running a [Temporal Service](https://docs.temporal.io/clusters) by launching it from a Terminal session, as discussed in the [Getting Started tutorial](https://learn.temporal.io/getting_started/java/dev_environment/):

```bash

> temporal server start-dev

Reviewer: We decided a while back to always set the UI Port to 8080. People default look for it there and if the cli team ever decides to move ports again (it's happened) then it doesn't affect any of our conten.t 
```suggestion
temporal server start-dev --ui-port 8080
```

```

> If a Service is already running, you do not (and cannot) have to re-launch it again.

Reviewer: This read weird and seemed unnecessary. Technically if you chose another port you could run more than one Temporal Service on the machine. 
```suggestion
If a Service is already running, you do not have to re-launch it again.
```

If you are running a Unix-like system, you can check for this by issuing `pgrep`:

```bash
pgrep -fl temporal
```

### Workflow Execution

> When you _start_ a Workflow, you tell the Temporal Server, "Track the state of a Workflow that uses this method signature."

Reviewer: I'm not certain this is correct. It does more than just track. It's accurate but reductive. It also manages Task Queues, schedules Tasks. I don't know how to fix it but I don't know if I'd introduce it this way.

Reviewer: I think "Manage the state" might be better, but I'm not sure.

Author: Running that through as well. Thanks!

The Workflow Execution represents a complete history of the Workflow's lifetime, including its intermediate states, its retries, and so forth.

The Service breaks down the Workflow Execution into pieces, called Tasks.
There are Workflow Tasks and Activity Tasks.
Workers look for those Tasks on "Task Queues" (called "polling" for Tasks).
That's why when you set up a Java Worker, you must tell it the Task Queue it should use to look for work.

A Worker runs each piece of the Workflow separately, Task by Task.
Whether that Task runs perfectly or it encounters issues, the Worker relays the execution events and results back to the Server.
This is recorded into the Event History for the Workflow Execution.

Workflow Executions "live" on the Temporal Server.
In the most basic form, a Workflow Execution consists of a set of set-up data and an Event history.
You initiate a Workflow Execution with the name of a Workflow Definition (the `MoneyTransferWorkflow` class), a Task Queue name to use, and optional input data.
Each Workflow Execution has an identifier.

> If you do not supply one, the Service creates a random unique ID to use instead.

Reviewer: This is actually only true for certain SDKs. In some SDKs you _must_ provide one. Might want to double check this.

Author: Adding it to my check list too. Thanks again.

### The Transfer application

The "money transfer" app is a small Java program that creates a Workflow Execution.
In a real deployments, you might invoke similar code when someone submits a form, presses a button, or visits a certain URL.
Here is the code that performs this work:

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-initiate-transfer {"selectedLines": ["31-70"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

> This code builds a Temporal Client, which is a type that can communicate with the Temporal Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code builds a Temporal Client, which is an object that can communicate with the Temporal Service.
```

The Client is used to create a new Workflow stub that points to the Workflow method.
With the details for the transfer collected together in a single instance (`transaction`), the `WorkflowClient` type creates a new Workflow Execution using the stub and the `transaction` instance.

> The execution runs asynchronously.

Reviewer: I can't see the code but if it's using `activities.withdraw` and not a Promise (which I haven't heard you mention) it's not asynchronous.

Author: Updating the wording. Thanks.

The Workflow Execution (Event History and other metadata) lives on the Temporal Service.
Exiting the application does not affect this.

### Run the money transfer app

To run the app, issue this Maven command:

```
mvn compile exec:java \
    -Dexec.mainClass="moneytransferapp.TransferApp" \
    -Dorg.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=warn
```

It creates a new transfer request for a random amount between $15 and $75:

```bash
MONEY TRANSFER PROJECT

Initiating transfer of $45 from [Account 711713707] to [Account 221056126].

[WorkflowID: money-transfer-workflow]
[RunID: 37688cca-ffa2-48cf-809b-f18f5119bca3]
[Transaction Reference: a0061bb5-a718-47cb]
```

The request is produced as a Workflow Execution and sent to the Temporal Server.
The Temporal Server is an essential part of the overall system, but requires additional components for operation.
The complete system is known as the Temporal Service, which is a deployment of the Temporal Server, plus the additional components used with it such as a database like Apache Cassandra, PostgreSQL, or MySQL.

:::note

This app uses a hard-coded "money-transfer-workflow" string for the Workflow ID.

> If you run the transfer app a second time, you'll raise an error unless a Worker is running and has already processed the previous request.

Reviewer: My memory is foggy on this, but is this true? I know it's true in Python but I thought Java just ignored it if you tried to invoke a Workflow with the same workflow-id as one already running.

Reviewer: Just tested this. It's not true in Java. Java will just fail silently.

Author: I had errors, but I'm going to omit because it's really not that important.

If this happens to you, just ignore the error.

:::

Next, you'll explore one of the unique value propositions Temporal offers: application state visibility.

## View Workflow state with the Web UI

Temporal's Web UI helps visualize your Workflow Executions.
It enables you to inspect your Workflow Executions details as it runs.
You use this interface to track the results of Activities and Workflows.
It also helps you identify problems with your Workflow Execution.

> 1. Visit the [Temporal Web UI](http://localhost:8233).

Reviewer: 8080 if using the command I mentioned above
```suggestion
1. Visit the [Temporal Web UI](http://localhost:8080).
```

>    This is hosted by the local development server using 'localhost' on port 8233.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   This is hosted by the local development server using 'localhost' on port 8080.
```

```bash
Worker is running and actively polling the Task Queue.
To quit, use ^C to interrupt.
```

In production environments, Temporal applications often operate with hundreds or thousands of Workers.
Adding more Workers boosts scalability.

### Worker Code

Like the transfer application, your Worker app creates a stub to talk to the Temporal Service and wraps it into a Client.
In the Java SDK, a Worker Factory creates new Workers and assigns their Task Queue.
You register the implementations for the tasks the Worker will manage, both Workflow and Activity types.
Finally, you start the Factory to begin executing the Worker or Workers you have created.

<!--SNIPSTART money-transfer-java-worker {"selectedLines": ["3-39"]}-->
<!--SNIPEND-->

When you start a Worker, it begins polling the Task Queue for Tasks to process.
The Worker continues running and blocks, waiting for Tasks to execute.
It does not exit and return control to the command line.

A Worker:

- Only processes Workflow and Activity Tasks registered to it.
- Knows which piece of code to execute based on the Tasks it gets from the Task Queue.
- Only listens to the Task Queue that it's registered to.

> ### ![](/img/icons/harbor-crane.png) Use the Web UI to explore

Reviewer: Alt text
```suggestion
### ![Crane clip art](/img/icons/harbor-crane.png) Use the Web UI to explore
```

> Return to the [Temporal development service Web UI](http://127.0.0.1:8233).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Return to the [Temporal development service Web UI](http://127.0.0.1:8080).
```

Here's what happens when the Worker ran:

- The first Task the Worker finds is the one that tells it to execute the Workflow.
- The Worker initiates the Workflow Execution by creating a new Workflow Task.
- The Workflow Task initiates the Workflow method execution.
- In turn, this method arrives at the Activity stubs. The first is 'Withdraw'.'
- The Worker schedules the Activity Task to request Activity Execution.
- The Activity Task starts and completes. The Worker communicates these events back to the Server.
- Control returns to the Workflow by scheduling a new Workflow Task, allowing the Workflow Execution to continue to the next Activity, 'Deposit'.
- The Worker schedules the new Activity Task, which is then picked up, started, and completed.
- Again control goes back to the Workflow and a new Workflow Task.
- The Worker schedules the Workflow task, picks it up for execution, starts it and completes it.
- With this, the Workflow Execution completes as there is no more work to be done or Tasks to schedule.

Each step is recorded in the Event History.

Now that you've seen an Execution run and complete, it's time to introduce a failure.

> ## ![](/img/icons/warning.png) Simulate failures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## ![Warning icon](/img/icons/warning.png) Simulate failures
```

Temporal is built to allow failure-prone processes to keep moving forward.

> It provides the backbone and oversight (called "Orchestration") that enables this without you having to develop the technology in your own code.

Reviewer: We need to check if we're allowed to say Orchestration. We've gotten some flack about this before.

Author: 👍

> It provides the backbone and oversight (called "Orchestration") that enables this without you having to develop the technology in your own code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It provides the backbone and oversight (called "Orchestration") that enables this without you having to develop the capability in your own code.
```

This keeps your code focused on your business logic and not on recovery strategies.

Despite your best efforts, services and other items will fail.
One of Temporal's most important features is its ability to maintain the state of a Workflow during a failure and continue on once that failure resolves.
To demonstrate this, you will simulate failures for your Workflow and see how Temporal responds.

### Recover from a server crash

Unlike many modern applications that require complex processes and external databases to handle failure, Temporal preserves the state of your Workflow even if the server is down.
Test this by stopping the local Temporal Cluster while a Workflow is running.

Try it out by following these steps:

1. Stop your Worker.
   Switch to the terminal that's running your Worker and press `CTRL+C`.
1. Return to the terminal window running the development server.
   Shut it down with `CTRL+C`.
1. After the Temporal Cluster has stopped, restart it to use a local database.

   
```bash
   temporal server start-dev \
       --log-level=never \

>        --db-filename=temporal.db

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       --ui-port 8080 \
       --db-filename=temporal.db
```

   ```

1. Switch back to the terminal where your Workflow ran.
   Start a new Workflow Execution.

   
```bash
   mvn compile exec:java \
       -Dexec.mainClass="moneytransferapp.TransferApp" \
       -Dorg.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=warn
   ```

   Note the WorkflowID and RunID.
   They also appear in the WebUI and help you locate the process you were using.

1. Return to the development server terminal session.
   Shut it down with `CTRL+C`.
1. Re-start the server, using the same data.

   
```bash
   temporal server start-dev \
       --log-level=never \

>        --db-filename=temporal.db

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       --ui-port 8080 \
       --db-filename=temporal.db
```

### Recover from an Activity error

Explore how Temporal responds to failed Activities and works with your timeout and retry policies
The `deposit` Activity lets you "fail" a deposit when you set `activityShouldSucceed` to `false`.

Your Worker app should not be running at this time.
Recompile it and run it to pick up this new logic.

```bash
mvn clean install \
    -Dorg.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=info 2>/dev/null
mvn compile exec:java \
    -Dexec.mainClass="moneytransferapp.MoneyTransferWorker" \
    -Dorg.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=warn
```

:::note

You must compile and restart the Worker every time there's a change in code.

:::

Now visit the Worker running in the terminal window:

```bash
Withdrawing $63 from account 714985048.
[ReferenceId: cc935eb0-cfe1-421e]
Deposit failed
Deposit failed
Deposit failed
[cc935eb0-cfe1-421e] Deposit of $63 to account 993113084 failed.
[cc935eb0-cfe1-421e] Refunding $63 to account 714985048.

Refunding $63 to account 714985048.
[ReferenceId: cc935eb0-cfe1-421e]
[cc935eb0-cfe1-421e] Refund to originating account was successful.
[cc935eb0-cfe1-421e] Transaction is complete. No transfer made.
```

> The Worker completed the `withdraw` activity but errored (as you set) with `deposit`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Worker completed the `withdraw` activity but failed (as you set) with `deposit`.
```

In this log, the Activity ran out of time, stopped after 3 retries, and the Workflow moved onto the compensating activity.

> ### Review the failed activity with the Development Server WebUI

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Review the failed Activity with the Development Server WebUI
```

> Visit the [Temporal Web UI](http://localhost:8233) and click your Workflow Id to view the Workflow details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Visit the [Temporal Web UI](http://localhost:8080) and click your Workflow Id to view the Workflow details.
```

The Event History is longer this time and contains an ActivityTaskFailed event.

![ActivityTaskFailed event](images/activity-task-failed-event.png)

Click on this to reveal the detail information about the failure call.

![ActivityTaskFailed event details](images/activity-task-failed-details.png)

### Retry Logic

> Without Temporal Orchestration, you must implement timeout and retry logic within the service code.

Reviewer: Again, verify we can say Orchestration

Author: Changing to oversight.

By default your code will be retried forever, unless a Schedule-To-Close Timeout or Start-To-Close Timeout is specified.
This is not a good outcome.
You want your code to complete (best outcome) or fail sensibly (an acceptable outcome), not to hang forever.
Failing "sensibly" means that you can revive your failed Workflows by changing the services it relies on or re-establishing other ways that ensure Workflow success.

### Increase the bug severity

Next, you'll make the Workflow fail harder.
That is, you'll override some code that makes `deposit` continue to fail and prevent the timeout and recovery mechanisms from stepping in.

1. Quit the Worker if it is still running.

1. Make sure the `deposit` will still fail.

   ```java
   boolean activityShouldSucceed = false;
   ```

1. Increase out the maximum number of attempts from 5 to a much bigger number:

   ```
   .setMaximumAttempts(5000)
   ```

1. Increase the schedule-to-close timeout from 5 seconds to a much bigger number:

   ```
   .setScheduleToCloseTimeout(Duration.ofSeconds(5000))
   ```

> 1. Compile and run the updated Worker

Reviewer: I typically don't compile the individual pieces. I just `mvn clean compile` and compile the whole thing. Then use `mvn exc` to run.

Author: Good feedback.
